
Page 1 of  1

The University of Mississippi

General Employment Policies for Faculty Members

The University's general employment policies for the teaching and research staff are formulated in
accordance with that portion of the Board of Trustees Bylaws and Policies entitled "Employment
and Tenure of Faculties of Institutions of Higher Learning in Mississippi," as adopted on October
17, 1974, and by such revisions as may be made by subsequent Board action.

The Board of Trustees contracts with all faculty members, and it has the authority to terminate a
contract at any time for malfeasance, inefficiency, contumacious conduct, or for cause, but never
for political reasons.  Under extraordinary circumstances the Board has the right to terminate
contracts of persons with continuing employment if a state of financial exigency exists or an
academic or administrative program or unit is terminated or reduced.  The Board empowers the
Chancellor to nominate individuals for faculty positions, but reserves the right to accept or reject
any nomination.  If rejecting a nomination, the Board will furnish its reasons to the Chancellor,
who may resubmit the nomination with clarifying explanations or may submit a substitute
nomination.  If the Board's rejection of a nomination constitutes a termination of employment, a
full and appropriate hearing will be held, if requested by the faculty member terminated, as
provided for in the Board statement of policy cited above.  

Faculty members are nominated for one year periods of service.  Full-time employees in one of the
professorial ranks may be granted tenure under the provisions of the tenure policies outlined
subsequently, and may be terminated only in accordance with these provisions.  Board policy does
not permit the granting of tenure to instructors.  

The terms of every new appointment shall be stated in writing and be in the possession of both the
prospective faculty member and the administration before the appointment is consummated.  Each
time a faculty member is reappointed, the terms of his or her reappointment will be stated in
writing and be in his or her possession before the expiration of the faculty member's previous
appointment, to the extent possible.  Since no contract may legally be signed until the Board of
Trustees has approved annual budgets, and since such approval may sometimes not be given until
after termination of the academic year, it may not be possible to guarantee any upcoming year's
salary before the expiration of a previous appointment.  In such instances, a faculty member will
upon request be furnished in writing the terms of his or her reappointment which have been
recommended to the Board.

At the time of his or her employment, a new faculty member shall be informed that a copy of the
complete A Handbook for Faculty and Staff is available in each chairperson's office for
departmental use; the Handbook is also available on the Universityâ€™s web site.  Upon request he
or she will be furnished with a copy of all regulations governing employment and tenure.  

Faculty Rank at Appointment.  The recommendation of rank for all prospective faculty
employees will begin in the department of the candidate and will be consistent with departmental
policy, such policy being contained in a written statement previously approved by the
Provost/Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs.  The vehicle for the recommendation is the
processing of the appropriate personnel forms.


	Page 1

